---
layout: post
title: Exercise 7  - Joining Data to a Shapefile in QGIS
---

## Joining Data to a Shapefile in QGIS

###  Join Attribute Data to a Map

1. If QGIS is open, close it and restart the application.

2. From the Exercise7 folder, add the Brazil shapefile and open the Attribute Table.

3. Open the file `BrazilData.xls` in Excel. This file contains population data by administrative region (in column 4), which you will join to the Brazil shapefile in order to map it. What you need to do is to determine which column both tables have in common. Take a note of what these are called.

4. Save the data as a comma delimited file (`BrazilData.csv`). Close Excel.

5. Unfortunately, QGIS will read in this data entirely as text so if you have numbers you wish to map, this will not be possible unless you create a second file. This file can be found in the Exercise7 folder and is called `BrazilData.csvt` (notice the extension!). Open this file in Notepad. You can see that it consists of only one line with the data types for the file where the numeric data are contained in column 4 (or Integer data). Close this file.

6. Choose Add Vector Layer and add the `BrazilData.csv` file (ignore the .csvt as it is read automatically). Make sure you change the extension to *Comma Separated Value [OGR]*. Click OK to add it.

7. Double click on the Brazil shapefile to open the Properties window.

8. Choose the Joins tab. Click on the green plus sign to bring up the Add vector join window. Make sure BrazilData is in the Join layer and select the columns in the map file and the BrazilData file that are in common. Click on OK twice. This will complete the join. Open the attribute table and you should see the population data at the end of the table.

9. Now create a map of the population data which you joined to the Brazil shapefile using the Style tab of the Properties window. Consult a previous exercise if you do not remember how to make a shaded or choropleth map.
10. At this stage the join is not permanent so right click on Brazil, select Save As and save it to a new shapefile. Open the attribute table to confirm that the data are now present in the new shapefile.

### Optional advanced exercise if you have time

With the original Brazil shapefile, repeat this exercise using `BrazilBadData.xls`. I introduced some errors in this file. Try to figure out what you can do to fix them and get the join to work. Before you do anything, remove the join from the Brazil shapefile in the Join tab of the Properties window.
