---
layout: post
title: Exercise 8  - Querying in QGIS
---

##  Querying in QGIS

In this exercise you will learn how to:
- Query by Attribute
- Query by Location
- Save your Selections.


### Query By Attribute

#### Query Numerical Fields

1. Remove all layers used in the previous exercise. Let’s revisit the schools data in West Yorkshire to do a few simple queries. Load the wyorkmap and schools shapefiles from the Exercise2 folder. Note that wyorkmap is only being used to provide a backdrop in this exercise.

2. Open the schools attribute table (right click on the name and select open attribute table) and take a look at which fields contain numbers (as opposed to text). Let’s start by selecting schools with larger numbers of pupils, i.e. more than 100.

3. Click on the Select features using an expression button: near the top of the table. Build a simple query to select those schools that have more than 100 pupils. Simply double click on the field name Pupils (expand Fields and Values) to transfer it to the Expression box below. Type in the rest of the query. Press select. What happens in the table and what happens on the map?

4. Do a further query on this selected set to find out how many schools have an English mark greater than 80. Write a new expression for this Then click on the dropdown area beside the Select button at the bottom of the Select By Expression screen and choose Select within Selection.

5. How many schools fit these two criteria?

6. Now redo the query in one step using the AND operator (but first clear the selection by clicking on:
. Then repeat the procedure entering an expression like that found below. Remember to double click on the field names to transfer them to the Expression box at the bottom. Clear your selection when you are finished

7. Try a few more queries.

	- How many schools have a rating of more than 150?
	- Of these schools, how many are located in Leeds?
	- Of these schools, how many have both English and Science marks greater than 90?

	*Once you are happy you understand this, clear your selection and continue.*

#### Query Text Fields
1. Let’s now query fields that have text. Do a query where the LEA (local education authority) is equal to ‘bradf’ (which is short for the city of Bradford near Leeds). This will show you all the schools in the Bradford LEA. Use the All button in the Values box to retrieve all unique values in the LEA column. Then populate the query by clicking directly on these values:

2. Now modify the query so that all schools in LEAs are selected that begin with the letter w. The query will look like this: “LEA” LIKE ‘w%’. Here, % is a wildcard character.

3. Now try the following expression: LEA IN ('bradf','kirkl','wakef') – this will select all schools that are in one of these three areas.

4. You can, of course, combine numerical and text queries into a single query. Try doing this query: How many schools in Calderdale and Leeds have Science grades greater than 85?
5. Feel free to think of a few other queries and try these out.

### Query by Location
We will now try some simple spatial queries.

1. Add the Motorways shapefile, which you will find in the Exercise8 folder. Change the symbology of the motorways so they appear more prominently on the map.

2. Right click on the Motorways layer, select Set Layer CRS and choose OSGB 1936. You may have to do this for wyorkmap and schools as well. Zoom to layer to bring the layers back into view.

3. Now suppose we want to do a query that shows all schools that are within 2 km of a motorway since you want to be able to pick up your children quickly.

4. First you need to draw a buffer around the motorway that is 2 km on each side. To do this select Vector > Geoprocessing Tools > Buffer(s). Make sure that the motorway file is the input vector, enter a distance in metres because this is the basic unit of the motorway file, and enter a shapefile name. Click on the option to dissolve the buffers. Close this screen and load the shapefile.

5. If you wish to view the schools beneath the buffer, double click on the buffer and change the transparency setting.

6. Now perform a spatial query by clicking on the Spatial Query button
. If you cannot find it, you will have to enable this plugin. To do this, select Plugins > Manage and Install Plugins… and select the Spatial Query Plugin, this should now appear under the ‘Vector’ menu.

7. Now build a spatial query that selects the schools contained within the buffer. How many schools are selected?

8. How would you show the opposite result, i.e. show the schools that are not within 2 km of a motorway (because you think motorways cause asthma and you do not want your children exposed to this). Hint: This is tricky so feel free to ask for help.

9. Once you have selected all the schools that are at a distance greater than 2km away from the motorway, do another query that shows you where the average math grade is 90 or higher (because you want to send your children to a school that is strong in maths). What kind of query do you need to do?

### Save your Selections
It is possible to save the selection to a separate file by right clicking on the layer in the Layers Panel, selecting Save As and then checking the box for save only selected features under the encoding tab, you should also specify a shapefile name and a location. Try to save one of your selections as a new shapefile, load it and notice how it only contains a subset of the original data.
