---
layout: post
title: Exercise 5  - Working with tables
---

## Working with Tables
This exercise will help you become familiar with the attribute data (or variables) that sit behind your map. In particular, you will be able to:

- View attribute data
- Select and highlight records
- Create a new field
- Perform a calculation in the field
- Edit data in the table
- Calculate basic statistics.

### View Attribute Data
1. Remove any existing layers and reload the `States.shp` shapefile from the **Exercise3** folder.

2. In the Layers Window on the left, right click on **States** and select **Open Attribute Table**. What types of data does this table contain?

3. Click on any column name and this will sort it in ascending or descending order. You can use this feature to look up information in the table quickly. For example, which state has the lowest population in 2000? Which has the highest?

### Select Records
1. Use your cursor to select some of the records (by clicking on the far left hand side where the numbers of the rows are). These should turn blue. What happens on the map? You can use the Shift and Ctrl keys to highlight multiple records at once.

2. If you click on the **Show Selected Features** option, which you can choose from the drop down list located at the bottom left corner of the Attribute table screen, then only those records you selected will be shown. **Show All Features** again when you have understood what this function does.

3. At the top of the window are a series of icons. Hold your cursor over the icons to find out what they do. Find the one that unselects records and click on that.

### Create a New Field
In this section we will create a new empty field that will hold a calculation of the percentage of the population that is Hispanic.

1. Assuming the attribute table is still open, click on the Toggle editing mode button:

2. This will enable the New column button which would have been greyed out when editing mode is turned off. Click on this button and enter PercHisp (which contains the percentage of the population that is Hispanic) as the name and change the Type to Decimal number (real). Change the width to 15 and give the precision a value of 2. Click OK.

3. Examine the attribute table and you will see that the column has been created on the far right of the table. What is currently contained in the column?

### Perform a Calculation in the Field
We will now populate the newly created field (or column) with a formula to calculate the percentage of the Hispanic population.

1. From the attribute table, click on the Field Calculator button:

2. You will see the field calculator screen appear. Click on Update existing field and choose PercHisp from the list (which is the column you just created).

3. You need to enter a formula to calculate the percentage, which is simply the number of Hispanics in each area divided by the total number of people in that area multiplied by 100. You will need to convert the numbers from integer to real, building this expression:

    `toreal (“Hispanic”) / toreal (“Pop2007”) *100`

    Do not type this expression. Build it from the Function list. Start by opening Conversions and finding toreal. Double click on it. This will transfer it to the Expression window. Then open the Fields and Values list and find Hispanic. Double click on it to transfer it to the Expression window. Continue this way, building the formula above.

- Click OK and then see what has happened in the attribute table. Does it make sense? Click the Toggle editing mode button to turn off editing and save the changes.

- Create a choropleth map of this variable (graduated shading). Do you remember how to do this from Exercise 3? If not, go back to that exercise to refresh your memory. What are the top three states for Hispanic populations?

### Edit Data in the Table
1. To edit data directly in the attribute table, open the table and click on the Toggle editing mode button.

2. Make any changes you wish to the values in the table, e.g. change the spelling of one of the US states.

3. When you are finished, click on the Toggle editing mode button to turn editing off and discard the changes. Close the table.

### Calculating Basic Statistics
1. Select Vector > Analysis Tools > Basic Statistics from the main menu. This function is reasonably intuitive and only works on numerical values. See if you can answer the two questions below.

	- What is the mean population of all the states in 2007 and by how much does this vary?

	- What is the lowest number of females found in any one state?
